---
title: stm32-meson
subtitle: Using meson for stm32 development
date: 2020-01-30
tags: ["linux", "gcc", "meson"]


---

# STM32 Meson

I recently learned about the [meson](https://mesonbuild.com/) build tool and wanted to create a project using it.  I've been a big fan of [stm32-cmake](https://github.com/ObKo/stm32-cmake) which allows for easy setup of a stm32 project by simply specifying the directory of the STMCubeMX directory and the chip being used and the projects sets up the linker script, HAL source files, and CMSIS files.  So I've decided to create the [stm32-meson](https://gitlab.com/jhamberg/stm32-meson) project.

This was a big inspiration for my creation of this project in meson.  My goals for this project were to learn how to use the meson build system generation tool and to create an easy way for get started with STM32 boards for development.  I'll talk about some of the things that were easier with meson and some of the things that seemed harder then I would have expected.

First I'll show the expected usage of the project.

```sh
jhamberg@serenity ~/s/stm32-meson> meson build -Dstm32_cube_dir=$HOME/STM32Cube/Repository/STM32Cube_FW_G0_V1.3.0/ -Dstm32_chip=STM32G071RB --cross-file=stm32-meson/stm32.build
```

The stm32_cube_dir option points to to the CubeMX directory that contains all the build files for the STM32G0 family.  This directory contains all the HAL source files. The $HOME variable must be used because it doesn't currently seem that meson is able to expand the ~ character into the user's home directory.  The stm32_chip option specifies which STM chip is being used and will be used to configurare the build system with the correct flash size and ram size.  The cross-file must also be specified.  This contains the name of the ARM compiler that will be used.  It also contains all the proper linker arguments to save space for the embedded target.  This variable must be specified, because meson does not allow the build script to specify the cross compiler.

```python
project('stm32_meson', 'c',
  version : '0.1',
  default_options : ['warning_level=3'])

# Include the required modules to compile the projects. 
stm32_hal_components = ['uart', 'uart_ex', 'dma', 'gpio', 'tim', 'tim_ex']

# Include to setup all the board dependencies.
subdir('stm32-meson')

# Define STM32 executable.
executable('stm32-blinky',
  'main.c',
  dependencies : [stm32_cube_dep, stm32_cmsis_dep]
  )

```

A normal project is specified.  The stm32_hal_components variable contains a list of all the HAL components that are required by the project.  This allows for shorter build times by only including the required HAL components.  The stm32_chip can also be specified in the meson build script instead of being passed along at configuration time as well.  All the custom setup logic code in included in the stm32-meson/meson.build script.  The output of this script are two dependecncies called stm32_cube_dep and stm32_cmsis.  stm32_cube_dep contains the linker script dependency and the HAL sources to be included into the stm32-blinky executable.  The stm32_cmsis_dep is the dependency that includeds the startup files for the particular STM32 chip and CMSIS includes which allow certain abstractions to be used across all ARM architectures.

These dependences allow regular meson executables to be used to target STM32 chips in an easy to use method.

# stm32-meson Future Goals

My future goals for this project are to reach a certain feature parity with the stm32-cmake project.  My first goals is to slowly add other stm32 families to stm32-meson.  Currently, only the STM32G0 family is supported since that is one of the only chips that I have access to a development kit to test with.  Potentially I would like to add support for other third party dependencies that are included in STM32CubeMX like FreeRTOS.

Whenever I add support for other STM families, my goals is to add basic tests to make sure that all supported configurations compile sucessfully.  This will be tested with a script file that compiles the code for every single supported chip.

# Experience with Meson

Here I'll share some of my thoughts about the meson build system.  It's a relatively newer build system generator, so it's bound to change slightly in the future as more features are added.  Meson has been hevily used in a variety of GNOME software projects.  It's being used in dav1d which is a AV1 encoder/decoder.  The Arch's pacman package manager.  This is just a small list of the projects using meson as their build system generator.

One of the hard things that took a little getting used to is that meson is not Turing complete by design.  When a language is Turing complete it has a tendency to fall into something called the Turing tar-pit.  This means that the project can technically achomplish anything, but it is going to do it in a very complicated and messy way.

This made me think a little bit harder on how I wanted to accomplish my goals.  I could not simply make a function that added all the STM dependencies to an executable, because functions were explicitly excluded from the meson language.  I instead had to learn how to use dependencies to add this functionality which do seem to be cleaner then adding custom functions.

There is a limit to the amount of configuration that can be done.  For example the cross-file cannot be specified from inside the meson.build file.  This would have been very convienient to allow the library code to specify the cross-file purley based on the stm32_chip variable instead of having to make the user specify both the stm32_chip and the toolchain file.

Also another thing that is odd is that there is not a way to include other meson build files.  This means that there can only be one meson.build file per folder which can force the file to become very long if there is no other place to put the meson build file.  This was slightly inconvienient for the stm32-meson project because meson.build file had to be stuffed into a directory to be included as a directory instead of just including a whole directory.

Overall I'm eager to see how the meson project will improve the build eco-system for C/C++ projects.